All right, good morning.
Thank you for coming out
on this Wednesday morning.
Sorry we had to start so early,
but you know, when you're doing design,
you got to get going quickly.
My name is John Geleynse.
I'm the Director of
Technology Evangelism here at Apple,
and that's my team that put
on the iPhone Tech Talks,
the Leopard Tech Talks,
a couple years ago, the Tiger Tech Talks.
We're the guys who take the message from
WWDC out onto the road to your hometowns.
And so if you think that we
need to come to your hometown,
let me know.
And maybe we will.
But we met some great people on the road.
So this morning,
we're going to be talking about iPhone.
And
All of you can attest to the
fact that your iPhone is awesome,
right?
We've all experienced what the
iPhone is like because we've got one.
And anybody who's interacted
with an iPhone falls in
love with it pretty quickly,
because it's a very compelling device.
And it's not just because
of the industrial design,
it's largely because the fact that
this is a revolutionary device with
multi-touch technology and all the
other stuff that makes up iPhone,
this thing really delivers
a great user experience.
What's important here is that as
you consider designing for iPhone,
as you think about bringing
an application to iPhone,
that you have a plan.
Having a plan means that you're going
to aim for something very specific,
and that you're going to deliver
something really great for your users.
All right.
I do want to acknowledge
that it's very hard.
We've been working on this
at Apple for quite a while,
and it's proven to be
a very difficult task.
It's hard to design something
that's perfectly suited for iPhone.
It's hard to design something that
has just the right amount of features.
It's hard to do something that
is a very specific solution.
It's not the desktop.
And so that's where the challenge lies.
It's a very unique device.
It delivers a very
unique user experience.
And it's got all kinds of characteristics
that determine how you design for it.
And it makes it very different.
These characteristics make
it very different than what
happens on the desktop.
Secondly, I want to acknowledge that
it takes a lot of time.
Designing for iPhone, as I said,
we've been working on this a long time.
We've had a design team at
Apple working on the user interface,
the user experience for
iPhone for three years,
probably more.
And if it was more,
I didn't know about it.
But I only found out
about it three years ago.
So we've been working on
this for a very long time.
We're learning a lot about how to do it,
but it takes a lot of time.
And we've got a lot of very,
very bright designers working on this.
And the end result was amazing.
But I think the first takeaway
for you is you have to assign,
you have to prepare,
to allocate time to designing for iPhone.
The last thing is,
it requires dedication.
Designing something really
awesome for the iPhone requires
dedication on your part.
And by that I mean,
you have to pull together a
team of folks who are dedicated
to putting all of their energy,
all of their talent,
all of their time into this.
It's not something you can do just
as yet another platform for your
application or set of applications.
It's not just, you know, ah,
something that you'll
work on on the side,
yeah, yeah, by the way,
we gotta get that iPhone
product out of the way.
The best results on iPhone are
from teams who have dedicated,
you know, put a lot of dedicated folks
onto the task and worked really,
really hard for a long period of time
and come up with something really great.
And finally,
if you've done all those things,
the payoff is huge.
I mean,
you look at the results that we've gotten
in terms of product reviews for iPhone,
the customer feedback
that we've received,
your own experience,
you know that iPhone is great.
And I think that's the payoff.
And certainly, as I've worked with
developers for the last,
certainly, well, with iPhone,
we started the iPhone
Tech Talks last fall.
I began working with developers
creating web apps at that time.
And so probably the last eight
months I've been working with a lot
of companies designing for iPhone.
And the payoff for those
companies who did the right thing,
who spent the time and did
something really great was big.
They felt great about
what they have produced.
So it's absolutely worth it.
So today,
this session is all about design.
And what I want to talk about this
morning is the process that you're
going to go through to go from concept
to something a little bit more tangible,
a little bit more real,
and then finally to reality.
All right, so what is that going
to require on your part?
Well, the first part of what it's going
to require on your part is a change
in how you do development overall.
And I'm saying these comments,
all of the comments in this session
really come from my experience
working with all of the companies
that I've worked with over the
last eight months for iPhone,
and over the last nine years
of being at Apple working on
interface design for Mac OS X.
The first change you need to make
is rethink your development cycle,
because the typical development
cycle for most companies that I've
worked with is there's a very,
very small amount of
time allocated to design.
Now, maybe not that small,
but certainly the time allocated
to coding is much more.
There's a ton of time
allocated to writing code,
and the typical experience I've got is
I meet with companies who want to get,
you know, discuss interface design,
and they're all writing code.
And there's a great comic strip.
I saw one time years ago,
and I think I've shared
this on stage before,
there's a bunch of guys
sitting at a computer,
at computers, clearly programmers,
and the manager's going out the door,
and he goes, "You guys start coding,
and I'll find out what
they want," you know,
and he's kind of going out the door.
And so there's a natural
tendency among engineers,
among all of us,
to quickly get to brass tacks and go,
"Oh, what's the API," and get going.
And the key thing for iPhone,
creating something great on iPhone,
is to change that and
dramatically increase the
amount of time that you put in.
So I think that's the key thing
that I've been working on.
And then I want to make sure
that's a part of the process.
So I'm going to go ahead and go
ahead and talk to you about this.
So I'm going to go ahead
and talk about this.
I'm going to go ahead
And then I'm going to talk about this.
So I'm going to go ahead
and talk about this.
All right, so the process of going from
concept to reality is this.
We're going to go through
these four stages this morning,
and I want to explain each
one of these in detail.
So get ready to take notes.
We're going to move through
a lot of content really fast.
All right, the first thing to do is to
familiarize yourself with iPhone.
And this is accomplished by
basically living with the device.
It is key that everybody who
is on your design team spends
time with iPhone or iPod Touch.
I can't tell you how many times I've gone
into meetings where the primary coders
have an iPhone because they needed one,
or they had one already and
they convinced management
to do an iPhone product,
and the rest of the team is sitting
around the table interested in Apple's
feedback on what they should do,
and none of them have ever
really interacted with an iPhone.
So it is vital that everybody on your
design team have played with iPhone,
shared content with it,
listened to music on it,
received calls on it,
browsed the web and experienced
what it's like to be on iPhone.
The second thing that's important
is to understand the characteristics
that make iPhone different.
So one of those is the fact that
there is no mouse on iPhone.
Thankfully, the interaction with the
iPhone is through the finger.
So it's this multi-touch technology,
and it's gestures and tapping
on screen get things done.
That's very different from what
you might have been familiar
with designing for the desktop.
For the desktop, you've got,
whether it's a web app on the browser,
whether it's a native app on the desktop,
you've got the mouse
tracking the scroll bar.
You've got rollover
effects that you can do.
You've got drag and drop with key,
keyboard modifiers,
all kinds of things you
can do with a mouse.
You cannot do those things on iPhone.
As soon as you design for iPhone,
you need to keep that in mind.
That's a big difference.
Another thing to keep in mind,
another unique characteristic of
iPhone is the fact that you've
got an on-screen keyboard,
but it's not the same as the primary
keyboard you'd have on the desktop.
And that changes dramatically how
users interact with your application.
If you're heavily keyboard
intensive on the desktop,
you have to change things dramatically
to work properly on iPhone,
because entering the same amount
of data with a finger on an
iPhone is not nearly as efficient.
Another characteristic
of iPhone development,
or characteristic that
makes iPhone different,
is the fact that the
screen size is different,
obviously.
Things you can get away with,
the amount of real estate
you've got on the desktop,
is not nearly what you've got on iPhone.
And while iPhone is a 480 by 320 screen,
and it's 160 DPI,
it can do a lot of things on this screen,
it absolutely limits what you
can do in terms of visual design,
in many ways.
But it doesn't limit it,
it just constrains the amount
of stuff you can put on screen.
It actually, given its characteristics
of that small screen,
lets you do some really interesting
things visually to add richness
and a lot of value there.
In addition,
the last set of characteristics of the
iPhone that are unique are the fact that
you've got a camera built into iPhone.
This means that you can do things with
the camera within your application
and let users take photos and
do something with them relative
to what your application does.
In addition, you've got location,
so you can add the where variable and
think about how the location of your
user affects how your application works.
Maybe they care about
where other users are,
this type of thing.
Wi-Fi.
Wi-Fi means that you can create
Bonjour-enabled applications.
Maybe you're a chess game and you can
start playing with other players nearby.
Maybe you can hook up and
exchange information with other
users very quickly using Wi-Fi.
Bonjour is a great technology
for doing this kind of thing,
and the fact that your iPhone is
always connected means that your
application can get data and keep
things live and dynamic and interesting
for your user in a way that you can't
necessarily in a disconnected device.
And the last characteristic that's
interesting that makes iPhone
different from the desktop is the fact
that you've got this accelerometer.
So you saw some of the demos in Keynote
where people were driving Chromag Rally,
and the accelerometer lets you do a
lot of interesting things with input.
So a lot of characteristics
for iPhone that make it unique.
A lot of things that you need to consider
before you even begin the design process.
And that's the familiarization stage.
Next stage is to conceptualize.
Once you know what the iPhone is,
and you know what users
are experiencing with it,
you have an understanding of what to do.
Now is the stage where you can
get going with conceptualization,
which is really turning your
ideas into reality in many ways,
or at least beginning that process.
All right, and this is done by
defining your solution,
defining your feature set,
determining what your users are-- how
they're perceiving that feature set,
and then developing
some initial sketches.
Let's talk through each
of these one by one.
When you begin the process
of designing for iPhone,
you're going to come
from one of two places.
You're either going to
have a great new idea,
or you're going to take an
application that's already
on the desktop or on the web,
and you're going to bring it to iPhone.
So let's begin with the new idea.
Let's say we come up with this great idea
to do an interior decorating application.
So we scratch it on a napkin,
and now the question is, well,
what are we going to do with this thing?
What's it going to do?
And so the natural next step
is a deluge of features.
And so we can do all things
like layout planning.
Like for example, I mean,
we could do floor plan layout.
We could have this app, and we could move
chairs around on screen.
We could place tables.
We could have a palette of furniture
on the side and pick things,
just like Enigma, the game.
You can move pieces out.
That'd be a cool feature.
We could do things like
paint color coding,
and we could manage molding.
We could have a molding
chooser for kitchen cabinetry.
And we could go on and on and on.
And there's lots of stuff-- tile
management and color management,
paint choices, fabric selection,
curtain selection, light fixtures, right?
And it goes on and on and on.
And all of this is great,
because you have to start with something.
You've got to have this idea,
and then you're going to build a really
great collection of features that you're
going to decide at some point whether
or not you're going to keep them or not.
The second way of coming to iPhone
is you've got an app from the desktop
that you want to bring to iPhone.
Now of course you can't port
the application to iPhone.
The code can certainly
move over in many ways.
You've seen some examples of that
over the course of the week so far.
But bringing an application
from the desktop to iPhone
requires a lot of design applied.
So let's take an application
that we brought to iPhone and
look at that as an example.
So this is iPhoto.
Well, iPhoto has a ton of features,
right?
And if you're bringing an app
from the desktop to iPhone,
you're going to inherit those features.
And the question is,
how are you going to decide
which ones to put on iPhone?
So you either brainstormed an idea,
you've got a great idea,
and you brainstormed a bunch of features,
and you've got a bunch
of features over here,
or you're bringing an app from Mac OS X,
or from Linux or Windows, and you've got,
from the desktop,
and you've got a pile of
features that you inherited.
What are you going to do?
Well, I'd like to caution you,
first of all,
that all of those features are wanted.
There's a bounty on them,
and we want to pretend that they are,
not, we don't want to pretend,
we want to go after these features,
because that's not what
you're going to be building.
You're going to use those features
to enhance or augment or help
define what your solution is,
but that's not where you finish
the conceptual design phase.
So these features are wanted,
and that's not the
direction we want to go.
So we need to stop at that point,
once you've brainstormed
or inherited these things,
and focus yourselves back on the
need to define a solution and
not a collection of features.
Applications should not
be hosts for features.
Well, how do you decide,
of the features you've got,
how do you decide which ones to
bring to your iPhone application?
We do that with an application
definition statement.
If you've been to WWDC before,
you've seen me on stage before,
you've heard me talk
about this for Mac OS X,
it's completely applicable to iPhone.
The key thing here is that it's
important for you to have this statement,
a single statement,
that defines what your
application is going to do.
This statement is going to
capture your primary focus.
It's going to capture the primary,
the core, you know,
the core set of functionality
that your application is
going to bring to the user.
And it's going to basically enumerate
and define all of those things for you.
As well as identify your user audience.
Because it's very different,
your application will be very
different if it's for pilots,
as opposed to teachers,
as opposed to presenters, or biologists,
right?
An application for those four different
audiences is going to be very,
very different.
And you take a thing like iPhoto,
and you say iPhoto for
amateur photographers,
versus iPhoto for professional
medical researchers,
that's a different application.
So let's go through this exercise.
Let's go through this process
of bringing iPhone-- sorry,
iPhoto for Mac OS X to
the iPhone with photos.
So iPhoto on Mac OS X has an application
definition statement that reads this:
"Easy to use digital photo editing,
organizing and sharing for casual
and amateur photographers." Right?
That's a great,
succinct statement defining
what that application does.
And if you dig deeper
into that application,
it's got a lot of features,
a lot of menu commands,
a lot of palettes, a lot of toolbars,
and yet it's bundled on the Mac,
and most people use iPhoto extensively.
Most Mac users spend a
lot of time in iPhoto.
And in fact,
when you dig down into what they do,
because ultimately you're after the
core feature set or the core value
add that this product provides,
turns out that most users of iPhoto
actually spend most of their time
in iPhoto sharing their content.
It's not so much about editing.
It's a little bit about organizing,
but mostly it's about sharing.
Creating full screen previews,
so looking at things yourself.
Slideshows with music.
Calendars with photos.
Photos on it for family members.
Coffee table books.
Publishing to .Mac gallery.
And then photo casting.
A big part of iPhoto is sharing.
And that in fact is the primary focus
for most users within this application.
So that's a key point, right?
Take your existing app on the desktop and
analyze it from this perspective and say,
what is the core functionality?
What do users spend most of their
time doing in this application?
And then go to the solution you've
defined for your iPhone application,
which in this case is Photos,
and finalize your application
definition statement based
on the primary functionality,
the core set of capabilities of
the application on the desktop.
And in essence,
it's easy to use digital photo sharing.
For iPhone users, that's it.
That's all it's going to do,
and that's who it's for.
Now at this point,
you've got an application
definition statement,
you're going to start
to boil features down.
You're going to start taking these
two sets of these groups of features,
depending on which side
of the fence you are,
if you're a new app or you've
inherited an application,
and you're going to run them through
that application definition statement,
and you're going to pick the key
features that are most frequently
used by the majority of users
that are appropriate for mobile.
There's a lot of stuff that a
desktop application does that doesn't
make sense in the mobile context.
It's too complicated.
For example, floor plan layout,
CAD functionality.
There are certain things you're
not going to do on the iPhone,
because most people just pull an iPhone
out of their pocket or their purse,
they interact with it
for about 15 seconds,
and then they move on to the next
application or they put it back
and they keep going with their day.
And that happens a lot
over the course of the day.
So everything that you define for iPhone,
every feature you consider
putting on the iPhone,
has to be run through
that kind of a filter.
What do most of my users want?
What are they going to
be using most frequently?
And is this appropriate
for a mobile context?
So let's do that with the
feature set for iPhoto.
Let's run it through an
application definition statement,
the one that we created for
the iPhone version of this,
and let's see what it
does to the feature set.
So let's go back to this huge
set of features for iPhoto.
And you can tell that features
don't define the big picture.
They don't show you the big picture.
They just really are a list of stuff.
Now let's bring our definition
statement in for the iPhone
application we want to create.
So digital photo sharing
for iPhone users.
Let's move that to the top of the
screen and let's filter things through.
And what you get is,
as you go one by one, you say,
is this about sharing?
No.
Is this about sharing?
Is this for iPhone users?
Mm, that's not a feature that's going
to work in the mobile context,
so no.
And you just go through
one by one by one by one,
and what you end up with is a
dramatically smaller set of features.
Now we're making progress.
And in fact,
what we did for photos on iPhone
is we created an application
that lets you look at albums,
drill down into those albums,
and then go into full screen preview
and either flick through them or
start a slideshow with a little
bit of music playing and some
transitions that you can define.
And that's pretty much it,
except for the fact that there is a
toolbar at the bottom that lets you
forward those photos on to someone.
And that's another component of sharing,
right?
You can turn it into a context photo,
you can set it as wallpaper,
or you can put it up to .Mac
Mobile Me or whatever you're going to do,
but it's all about sharing.
Every feature of photos on
iPhone is about sharing.
Okay, now you've defined your solution,
you've got a clear
statement about what it is,
you've boiled your features down so
you've got a much smaller pile of
features that you're going to work with.
Now the question is,
how does the user perceive this solution?
What are they thinking of
when they consider something
like interior decorating?
Let's go back to the idea for a second.
Take a moment to think
about interior decorating.
What pops into mind for you?
This is the exercise you need to
go through with a cross-functional
team of folks in your organization
to look at your solution,
look at your collection of features,
and sort of get a sense for
what that's going to be,
and then say, all right,
how are our users going
to think about this?
What are immediately what comes to
mind for them in terms of objects,
tasks,
relationships between these things,
commonalities between elements on screen,
or between these objects and their mental
model of what they're trying to build?
This is a great exercise that I've told,
I have no idea how many companies,
I mean, hundreds of companies I've gone
through this exercise with.
Just get some pizza,
lock people away in a room for
three hours on a Thursday afternoon,
and say, okay, guys,
here's the definition statement.
Here's what we're going to build.
We're thinking of building
sort of conceptually.
How do our users think about this?
And once you've got this,
you're going to end up with
a result something like this.
So if you think of interior
decorating for a moment again,
you're going to end up with
something most users think of,
things like fabrics, paints, wallpaper.
lights, furniture, tiles, right?
The next thing to do is ask yourself,
what do these things have in common?
Because often understanding the
commonality of these things is
going to get you to the next stage,
which is identifying things
users are going to do with this.
So what do these things
all have in common?
Well, it turns out color is
what they have in common.
It's a great commonality
between these objects.
And so once you've defined
this commonality of color,
then you can do an interesting exercise,
which is to say, all right, well,
what things do you do with color?
What things could we do in
this application with color?
We can organize it.
We can annotate it.
We can blend it.
We can rate it.
We can share it.
We could do a community
of color palettes,
and we could push out certain
collections of colors for people to use.
Now, certainly,
you might not put that in the app,
but it's an idea.
And so the exercise is to identify
primary objects and tasks,
understand commonalities
between these things,
and start to pull these things
together and prioritize that list,
and decide what is it
that you're going to do,
which one of those are you
going to actually implement.
Great exercise.
And of course,
the last step is to turn everything
that we've gotten so far-- our
primary definition statement,
our collection of features,
our understanding of how the user
sees these things-- turn those
into some preliminary sketches.
So here's the interior decorating
application sketches and
some interesting stuff there.
We've even got some paint
mixing going on with the finger.
And we've got some paint cans
going on over here on the right.
So some great ideas.
It's a good place to start.
But you've got enough material.
You've got enough raw goods at this point
to start building something preliminary.
And this is where you need to be.
And then you can iterate on some of
these with what you've got already.
And you can end up with something
a little bit more solid,
maybe a little bit more defined,
a little clearer,
which is more of a blueprint model.
And at this point,
I'd like to invite a company on stage who
went through this process in preparation
for the launch of the iPhone SDK.
We had them on campus,
and they worked to develop an iPhone app,
and I'd like to invite AOL on stage
to talk about their experience.
Thank you, John.
Good morning.
I'm Todd Branham from AOL.
When we first got a
hold of the iPhone SDK,
we knew immediately we wanted
to bring AIM to the iPhone.
I've been asked to spend a few minutes
to talk about the design process we used.
At first, we were really concerned
about our schedule,
since we were really
starting from scratch.
But in retrospect,
I think this is actually
quite liberating.
So the first thing we did was
we took a look at our existing
AIM product on the desktop.
Here's a summary of some of its features.
This is just a subset.
I'm pretty sure you could
send IMs with it as well.
It didn't seem likely that
we're going to bring all of
these features to the iPhone.
And even if we did,
it didn't seem like it
would make it more valuable.
So we started to think about
AIM on the iPhone as being an
AIM experience away from your desktop.
It didn't have to replace the desktop.
What makes the iPhone so amazing to me
is the number of tasks I can accomplish
while standing in line somewhere,
just in a few seconds.
So it was important that we kept
our application quick and simple.
So what features do we really need?
We kept it just the basics.
A buddy list, conversations,
and buddy profiles.
Then we took a look at existing
applications running on the
iPhone to try to identify common
UI concepts and paradigms.
Some people have hundreds of
buddies on their buddy list.
So we considered using the concept
of favorites or favorite buddies.
So you can have a subset of buddies
that are more relevant to you
while you're using your phone.
Then we again looked at our desktop
products and tried to identify
how platform differences would
change how the user would use AIM.
For example, on the desktop,
typically a user is asked
to manage several windows,
a skinny buddy list,
or one or more conversation windows.
Then we sat down and started sketching
what our AIM application might look like.
Doing this with paper and pencil
allowed us to quickly and cheaply
iterate on our ideas without committing
ourselves to a course of action.
Using our UI concept document,
or our UI concept sketches,
we were able to quickly identify the core
objects required to implement the UI.
Only after we defined our feature set,
had a concept UI,
and identified our core objects
were we ready to start coding.
We spent a lot of time thinking about
how to build aim for the iPhone.
And what we learned was that
building a conceptual model
prior to coding really pays off.
We learned that we needed to
keep our application very simple.
and we learned that we shouldn't
let existing code or application
design direct our thinking.
Take this chance to rethink
your application for iPhone.
Thank you.
Okay, great example,
great learning experience for both
Apple and for the folks at AOL.
So that's the conceptual design stage,
and there's a lot to do there,
and we haven't started coding.
Next stage is to realize.
You take your preliminary sketches,
you take everything,
all these raw ingredients that
you've pulled together and you've
got a clear direction with,
and you're going to turn these
things into something real,
but you're not going to start coding yet.
So we're going to do this by
assessing the application type,
your application type,
because that's going to do,
it's going to give you a
direction that you need to go.
It's going to help to find a
direction you're going to go.
The second thing we're going
to do in this stage is to
develop a navigation model.
And thirdly, you're going to design
your specific screens.
So you see this progression going on.
You start big,
and you're progressively getting
down to more and more detail
as you go through this process.
So let's begin with application type.
Understanding what kind of an application
you've got on iPhone is going to help
to determine the behaviors of your
application and the appearance of it.
Knowing what type of application you've
got is going to help to define the
visual and behavioral characteristics.
This is really important.
And I'm not talking about whether you're
a design application or a communications
application or a social networking
application versus a mail application.
That's not the kind of
application I'm talking about.
I'm talking about the genre of
application that we've got on iPhone.
There are basically three
types of applications.
Now, this is not a hard and fast rule.
This is just an exercise that helps
point you in the right direction.
So don't interpret from
this that there is,
like Apple has defined,
three types of applications.
We're just saying that at this time,
we see sort of clearly-- there are
three clearly defined application types,
being productivity, utility,
and immersive.
And there are certainly going
to be more in the future,
I'm sure.
And there are certainly
places in between these.
And we'll talk about that now.
So the first example is productivity,
or first type is productivity.
This is the application that you
would find on iPhone called Mail.
It's a great example of it.
Second type is utility.
Utility is just like the Stocks app,
or just like the weather application,
or just like Notes maybe.
Notes kind of falls into that realm.
And an immersive application
would be something like an Enigmo,
which was demoed in
the keynote on Monday,
or any type of full screen game
that takes over the entire screen,
has custom UI, and has those kinds of
behaviors and appearances.
So let's talk more about these in depth.
And the way to do that is we're
going to talk through a grid.
But understanding the type of application
helps you to orient your design.
It's going to determine--
you're going to say,
I'm more like this
kind of an application.
And so you can use it as a model for what
you do with your preliminary sketches.
And it's going to help define
the direction that you head.
So let's talk about these
application designs with a very,
very simple graph.
Across the bottom,
we're talking about the usage
pattern for your application.
And on the one side,
we've got entertainment.
The usage pattern for your application is
going to be more entertainment focused,
versus the opposite end of the scale,
which is that it's more task oriented.
It's more tool focused.
And on the vertical,
we've got what is the content type
that your application works with.
Is it serious versus fun?
And let's map some of the
existing application types
to these different quadrants.
So the first is Serious Tool,
upper right.
You're talking about an application
that is very purpose driven.
It does or changes something.
Users interact with data,
and they do something with that data.
It's hierarchical in nature.
It's multi-window.
You've got cascading hierarchy model.
And typically,
these types of applications
have minimal graphics.
They're not very rich visually.
It's really not about how they look.
It's what you can do with them.
So that's an application that
sits up in the top right.
In the bottom right,
we've got a fun tool.
What's an example of a fun tool?
Well, this could be a social discovery
application like Whirl from Pelago.
Or it could be something like Looped,
or anything that kind of
connects you with fun content,
but that is still task oriented.
And these applications can
be visually richer than the
serious tool applications,
because there are components
of their content that are
interesting or more visually rich.
But they're largely about
interacting with the content
in a very task oriented way.
And they tend to have a smaller
information architecture.
Let's go to top left.
This is serious entertainment.
So the content is serious,
but the use case is more
entertainment focused.
What's an example of this?
I don't know.
Maybe an application for students
that lets them learn about the
Civil War or about some historical
event with very rich content.
Video, photos, you know,
these kinds of rich elements.
And yet the task is serious,
but the content is interesting.
tend to be more visually rich
than some of their counterparts.
And lastly, bottom left corner,
we get fun entertainment.
This is the immersive type.
This is where you get applications
that are very rich visually.
They don't really have,
from the user's perspective,
a complex hierarchy,
because the user is focused on gameplay,
not on data.
They're just moving through levels,
but the screen doesn't seem to change
other than maybe the characters
or the elements on the screen.
Overall,
it's not like they're cascading through
and navigating through multiple screens.
So you can see how each application,
or each type of application,
has different visual and
behavioral characteristics.
And understanding which one you're
like helps you to model yourself
after that type of application.
But there's a middle ground, obviously,
because not everything in
life is black and white,
and so applications don't
necessarily land cleanly in any
one of these specific quadrants.
So what about that middle ground?
Well, we still measure it
across the same scale,
obviously, but that's what we would call
the utility type of application,
and they have unique
characteristics as well.
Some examples of those would be notes,
stocks, photos, right?
iChat, iPod as well.
Some of them sit right on
the line between a quadrant,
some of them are close to the line.
But definitely,
the closer you are to a particular axis,
it helps to define differences in
your application versus something
that's much further away from the axis.
Now how do you deal with a utility?
What kinds of questions
can you ask yourself?
Well,
here's four that are useful for figuring
out where you are within the scale.
What does the user do
with the application?
What kind of work do they do with it?
Or don't they do work?
Do they play with it more?
What content does the application use?
What type of information do you display?
Is it very rich visually?
Is the focus of your application
more just kind of finding
information at a more leisure pace?
Depending on the different scenarios
that you play out or that you talk about,
you're going to have the dot
moving around on that graph.
And that's going to help you
determine where you're closer.
Are you closer to mail,
productivity serious?
Or are you more closer to
a game style application?
These applications are graphically rich,
typically,
if you think of weather or stocks.
They have pretty discrete functionality.
They only do one thing,
and they do that really well.
So discrete functionality,
they're narrow in scope,
they're consumption oriented,
they're largely about just launching
the app and looking at something,
checking the weather,
checking the stocks, checking a flight,
arrival time, that type of thing.
So those are the three
types of applications.
The whole point of this
exercise is not to define rigid
silos in which you develop,
but it is to give you a sense
of thinking about iPhone
design from that perspective,
and understanding which application
you're like so that you can
orient yourself towards that.
Now, the next step is to
determine your development,
your navigation model.
Navigating through your information is
a critical part of designing for iPhone.
Understanding how your users are
going to get from one level of
your application to another is
what's called the navigation model.
And this navigation model, of course,
depends on your application type.
If you're a serious tool,
like a productivity application,
like mail, you're going to go through
a hierarchical screen model.
If you're a game,
the way users navigate is by gameplay.
They move through different
levels of the game.
game, and et cetera.
So, some questions to ask yourself are,
what application type are you,
first of all?
How deep is your object model?
How complex is that object model?
And by object model, I'm talking about
information architecture,
right?
Behind the scenes, behind the UI,
you've got an information architecture
that determines which module you're in,
what collection you're in,
how the objects are
organized behind the scene.
And the complexity of that object
model is going to determine
your navigation model as well.
So if you're like a serious tool,
a productivity application like mail,
you're going to have a navigation
model that's very close to mail,
if not identical,
where you're going to move
from screen to screen.
And as you move down a branch of
your information architecture,
right, as you get towards an endpoint,
you're going to traverse
across screens on the iPhone.
So think of how mail works.
You start with a mailbox,
then you drill down
into the mail messages,
then you click there,
you drill down into the specific message,
and that's the end node.
If you're in the settings application,
which is what this example comes from,
you're starting at the highest level
of what groups of settings you are,
then you drill down into general,
then you get into network,
then you choose your network,
then you go down to specific
things like setting up boot P and
other details about the network.
So you progressively move down
towards an end node of your
information architecture branch.
So this is a great
principle to keep in mind,
which is this movement from general to
specific as you move down that branch.
Now,
as you're doing that navigation model,
you're going to have views.
And the best way to do this, of course,
is to provide for free from
UIKit is these nav bars.
And navigation bars let you
communicate clearly to the user
which screen they're arriving at,
because they tap an object on screen,
and then they traverse
to the next screen,
and it's named after the
item that they tapped.
And so you go through the sequence.
This is automatic for you if you build
an iPhone app with the iPhone SDK.
And as you move back through the levels,
the nav bar automatically,
as part of the navigation controller,
the nav controller object,
tells you what the
previous screen was named.
So you can point back to that
from the user's perspective.
They know where they're going back to.
That's how the navigation works,
and that's a perfectly functional
navigation model for iPhone applications.
But again, it depends on what
application type you've got.
A nav bar,
we figured out that maybe this is
the way we want to do navigation,
so now a nav bar is where you're going
to put certain types of controls.
You can put controls in
here that manage the view.
For example, in this particular case,
we've got the plus button.
So you can add, let's say,
a contact to the contacts list.
Or you can add,
there's different applications on iPhone
that have got a plus button there,
and you can tap that,
and now you can create
one of those objects.
It's in the nav bar because it's
probably something you would do no
matter where you are in the hierarchy.
It should only be a command related
to something that's primary,
an object that's really primary.
But you can certainly put
controls in the nav bar like that.
You can also put controls in the nav
bar that relate to managing the view.
So if you think of the
phone application on iPhone,
you have a segmented control at the
top that lets you toggle between
all missed calls or just-- sorry,
in the Recents tab, you're looking at all
calls or the recent calls.
I'm sorry I said that wrong,
but you know what I'm talking about.
You all have iPhones.
One thing to avoid when you're
putting nav bars on screen is
that you have home buttons.
So avoid having a home button
that's going to jump the user,
shortcut the user,
all the way to the top of the hierarchy.
The problem with this is it's
very disconcerting for the user.
They've moved down
through multiple levels,
and mentally they're kind of
following the progression.
And to jump them all the way
to the top makes them lose
context from where they are.
Another thing to avoid is any
kind of a breadcrumb trail.
The main problem with this is
you don't have enough screen
real estate to do this well.
So in this case, I've only got two here,
and I've already clobbered
the title of the screen.
And it's also not a scalable solution,
because as soon as you get
three or four levels deep,
you've got a breadcrumb trail that
extends across the entire screen.
So it's not a good idea
to do a breadcrumb trail.
The navigation controller,
the whole hierarchical model on iPhone,
is a great model,
because users are familiar with
it across all applications.
And so getting around is
not a big deal for anybody.
Doesn't matter what application,
you know that hitting the back button is
going to move you to the previous screen.
And lastly,
be very careful to not put too
many controls in the tab bar.
You don't want to clobber the title.
You don't want to make things
so cluttered up there that you
can't tap things efficiently
from a user's perspective.
Now, that's the simple
navigation model for iPhone,
which is the cascading
hierarchical screens.
But there's an alternative way,
which is to use tab bars.
These are for free in UIKit.
These are going to mirror
the user cognitive model,
because if you've come up with an
interior decorating application,
and you identify these primary objects
or tasks you could do with color,
those are going to be expressed probably
most effectively with a tab bar.
So tab bars are great if your
information architecture,
if the user mental model as well,
is oriented around collections or
categories or sets of information.
They're not a toolbar alternative.
Toolbars sit at the bottom of the screen.
I'll talk about this in a moment.
The main thing I want to say about tab
bars is only use them when you have
a complex information architecture,
and don't change them when they're
on the bottom of the screen.
Once you've put them there,
they're solid.
They should never move,
because they're an anchor point
for the user to move around within
your application and to navigate
throughout your application.
They also add a lot of efficiency,
because if you think of how
the click wheel iPod works,
you navigate down, you pick playlists,
you click and you navigate
through each level.
You start with, say, artists,
and you go down to the middle screen,
and then you choose an artist,
and you go down to the song screen,
then you play, and you go down.
That's how the iPod works,
and it's great.
But the problem with it is that
it gets you through this back
and forth navigation model.
Now, on iPod, it works because you're not
really going down too many levels.
But I've seen applications from
developers that are fairly complex
medical applications or what have you,
and they're going down many, many levels,
and this kind of a model
doesn't really work,
because their information
architecture is complex,
and it's deep, and it's broad.
And it means that users are going to
be moving up and down and up and down,
and so it's not that efficient.
The better way to do this is to use tabs.
This is a great example of where
tabs introduce an efficiency to
the navigation on iPhone that
your application can benefit from.
So as soon as you put tabs in, boom,
users just go songs, playlists, videos,
whatever they're interested in,
whatever the modules or categories
are of your application,
and they're good to go.
And they're within that
module very quickly.
Another thing to think about in terms
of navigation is to get users to the
things that are most important to them.
Now sometimes they don't know
what's the most important to them.
It's kind of like retailers put
end caps on in the store to say,
hey, you really want to be
interested in this product.
You walk into the store and boom,
there it is.
Well, we do that kind of thing
in the iTunes store.
We're like, hey,
here's some new music for you.
It's interesting to the user.
It's always different.
It's always engaging.
The same thing is true
with your application.
It's really important that your
application always take the user
to what's the most important
for them as quickly as possible.
In some cases, you might want to put up
some featured content.
In other cases,
if you launch for the very first time,
you could do what the Stocks
application does on iPhone,
which is the very first
time you launch Stocks,
it actually has some stock
symbols already loaded on screen.
Very cool.
Do not launch your application
with nothing on screen.
And lastly around navigation,
keep in mind the fact that
your application only runs,
it only runs by itself.
There's only one app
running at a time on iPhone.
And so the key thing here is that
from a navigation perspective,
you want to save state and restore state
so that you can bring the user back
to what's most important for them as
soon as they relaunch your application.
Because you know how iPhone works, right?
You're doing something,
you get an SMS and you
switch over to SMS.
You're doing something and you get a
notification of an event and you look
to the details of where that event is,
the meeting is.
You're doing something and
you get a phone call and then
that switches your attention,
you switch out the applications
and when you come back to the one
you were originally working on,
you want to be right
back where you started.
Or right back where you were,
rather than have to come into a home
screen and navigate down through
hierarchies and this kind of thing.
So running one application
at a time on iPhone is,
directly impacts the navigation model.
And so it's important to restore
a save and restore state.
And the final point
about navigation is that,
and I made this comment before,
the fact that you've got a
built-in keyboard on iPhone,
it's a touch screen keyboard,
it's not the desktop keyboard.
And so you can move users through
your application and get them to
what they are most interested in much
quicker if you minimize text entry.
You can do this with lists, a cascade,
these are free.
We've talked about this extensively.
You can do this with, pickers.
Pickers are great for multi-values
and for constrained sets.
They let you just quickly choose
times and dates and specify
the details of each of those.
And a great way to minimize typing
is to use presets whenever possible.
So think of where on screen the
user is going to be filling out
information in your application,
and if there's a list that you
could pre-populate with all of the
options that the majority of your
users are going to be interested in.
It's much faster to pick from a list,
or slide to another screen
to pick from a list,
or flick through a big
long list of 100 items,
than it is to actually
type in a city name,
or a pharmaceutical drug name,
or some kind of molecular name,
or whatever.
It's very hard to type on an iPhone
screen for long amounts of data.
Not very hard, but very inefficient.
Segment and controls are
part of the navigation model,
but now we're really getting
down to the nitty gritty,
right?
We're down to individual
screen design almost,
and I've talked extensively
about segment controls,
so I'm not going to belabor the point.
They're really mutually exclusive items,
and they let you manage what's on screen,
or within the body of a screen,
they're useful for like a radio button
set that you would do on the desktop.
All right, and at this point,
I'd like to invite another guest on
stage to talk about their experience
with this part of the process,
and that's Handmark.
All right, thanks.
Good morning.
My name is Doug Dickerson.
I run the product
management team at HandMark.
HandMark is a leading developer
and distributor of top quality
mobile games and applications.
We have a successful history
of developing some of the most
popular titles on the market today,
including household names like TV Guide,
Monopoly.
Earlier this year, we acquired Astroware,
which really added a lot
to our games portfolio.
Some great titles like Bejeweled, Sudoku,
Casino Games, etc.
But our flagship product
is Pocket Express.
Pocket Express provides users
immediate access to personalized news,
sports, weather information,
and more across a variety of devices,
from flip phones to PDAs.
And we have several million very
addicted users on BlackBerry,
Palm, Windows mobile devices.
So the decision to take Pocket Express to
the iPhone was really a no-brainer
for a couple of different reasons.
First, we literally started getting
calls the day the iPhone was
announced from our customers asking,
is Express available?
When's Express going to be available?
Second,
we all fell in love with the device.
So last summer,
we took turns standing in line,
waiting to get the device on day one.
Once we got it, we kind of ignored our
families for a couple of weeks
and played with the device.
One thing became
immediately obvious to me,
and that was that the bar
had really been raised.
That it was clear to me that
from that point forward,
everything our team designed was
going to be ultimately compared to
the core applications on the iPhone.
So we actually have a lot of experience
taking Pocket Express to new devices.
And one of the things that
we run into every time is we
really have two competing goals.
That one is we want to create a
Pocket Express signature interface
across all of the devices.
But on the other hand,
we want Express to feel like it's part
of whatever device it's running on.
So what I want to share with you
today are some of the challenges
that we ran into in designing
a Pocket Express experience
that feels like it's part of the
core set of iPhone applications.
[Transcript missing]
Based on our experience,
there's a few tips that I would give you
as you start designing for the iPhone.
The first thing is to really spend
some time studying the core iPhone
applications and try to figure out how
to relate what they're doing to the
problem that you're trying to solve.
And then second is to spend
the time up front to define all
the conceptual objects of your
application and how they relate.
What's the hierarchy of those?
Once you've done that,
then embrace tabs as a
method of navigating the
top level of your hierarchy.
And then when you get to
your base level object,
if there's more information that
you can display on one screen,
then use the segmented control to
allow the user to kind of manipulate
and figure what point of view
they want to look at that object.
And finally, just keep it simple.
So as you're making design decisions,
err on the side of making it
easy for the first time user as
opposed to fast for the power user.
Thank you.
All right, thank you, Handmark.
Two great examples, AOL and Handmark,
of going through this process
themselves and learning exactly
what it was that they needed to do,
and iterating through multiple designs
and learning from that process.
So at this point now,
we're moving through this conceptual,
and we're getting down
to the brass tacks.
Right now we're looking at, OK,
we've got our navigation model in place,
and Handmark just explained their process
there of realizing how that all works.
And now you're down to
an individual screen.
And I want to give you some
guidelines for putting together,
assembling those screens.
Now you'll notice I'm not talking a
lot about immersive applications today.
That's because for games,
you have a lot of freedom.
You've got the whole screen to take over.
And so most games are doing that fine.
They've got a great model.
It's very unique to this specific game.
I want to spend all my time
talking about basically the
utility type of application and the
productivity types of applications,
because that's what the vast
majority of you are creating.
And that's where the focus is.
That's why the focus is on this today.
So as we talk about
individual screen design,
there's a few things to keep in mind.
At the end of the day,
the entire process of designing
an individual screen is all
about keeping things clean,
clutter free.
It's all about readability.
If you pull an iPhone out of your pocket,
you're in line like the OL example,
and you want to do
something for 15 seconds,
you don't want to spend a lot of
time like flicking around and,
you know, what does that say?
And there's too much on screen
and all these kinds of things.
It's all about readability
and quick navigation of the
eye on that individual screen,
and then navigation model
across the entire application.
So clutter free design is key.
How do you do that?
Well, first of all,
you need to understand that each
screen represents an end node,
right?
So you have to ask
yourself questions like,
what's needed for this entity?
If we're on this screen,
what is the most important
thing for this screen?
How does this screen map to the solution?
Now we had an application
definition statement.
We chose our either brainstorm
features or inherited features.
We boiled those down.
We came up with the conceptual model,
some preliminary sketches.
We build a navigation model.
And now we're down to--
it's getting exciting,
right?
Because we're down to brass tacks.
We're ready to code.
I can tell you all want to code.
And at this point,
it's really easy to kind of forget
everything that you just went through,
to forget the application
definition statement.
But you can't, because at this point,
you have to keep filtering.
Keep filtering your features
through what the few features are
that the majority of users want,
that are appropriate for mobile context,
and that map to your product
definition statement,
and that are exactly what
are needed for this object,
for this entity on this screen.
This is the hard part, actually.
Actually, it's all hard,
but this is particularly hard.
So review your application
definition statement.
Keep your features in bounds.
Don't go off into a tangent because
this screen kind of looks cool,
and suddenly now you're adding camera
functionality and it makes no sense.
Focus on the purpose of this screen.
I'm just saying sort of the
same thing over and over so
that you drive home the point.
Additions to each screen
should enhance what's there.
Don't add something because there's
a little bit of room in the toolbar,
and one of the engineers spent a lot of
time last night working on something,
and so you really want to reward them
by putting an icon in the toolbar.
Avoid cramming too much on the screen.
Again, think about how what your
experience has been with iPhone.
You've familiarized
yourself with this device.
You know exactly how it works
and what you love about it.
Make sure that whatever you design for
iPhone as well fits into that mold,
and that other users are going to go, oh,
they're using your application.
They go,
this is what's great about iPhone,
this third-party app that they bought.
So does it make sense for
something to be on screen?
Is it critical functionality?
Some other questions to ask.
Is it frequently used?
Well, let's define frequently.
Is it used every time
they're on this screen?
Almost always?
Or sometimes?
Or is it just when a selection is made?
What's important now from
the user's perspective?
When I'm on this screen,
what do users need to do?
Prioritize items most
frequently used as well.
As you're laying out these screens,
put the most important,
most frequently used,
definition of important
is frequently used,
things at the top of the screen.
Notice here in the contacts page,
this is in the phone application,
and so we're looking up a number
because we're going to call somebody.
It makes sense that the telephone
number is at the top of the screen,
because that's the thing we're
going to probably most likely,
most frequently, most often,
most of our users are
going to want to get to.
If we listed the street address first,
what would happen?
What would happen in terms of
the interaction model for iPhone?
Got to phone my friend, look up friend.
Page the screen-- oh,
there's the phone number--
and dial the phone number.
So think about how the screen is used,
what are users trying
to accomplish with it,
and how can you lay out the data so
the most important stuff is at the top.
Group related items.
This seems obvious,
but I can't tell you how many times
I've sat down with people and it's
like there's a number up here that
relates to a number down here,
and in between there's
a lot of text and stuff,
and it's just kind of
randomly put on screen.
Not the buckshot stuff that we've
seen on Mac OS X in past years,
by the way, but anyway.
So group related items.
You can do a great job with
group tables on iPhone.
And another part here, broken slide here,
is to, another important thing is to
eliminate extraneous content.
So minimize the number of grouped
item titles that you've got on screen.
We really only do that in settings.
The rest of the time you can
tell that it's phone numbers,
etc., by the data itself.
Provide fingertip size targets.
So when you're designing
an individual screen,
make sure that everything that's
tappable is at least 44 points square.
That's going to pretty much do it.
define what you can put on a given line.
Use standardized built-in controls.
We bundle these.
They're all part of iPhone SDK.
There's a rich set of
controls built into UIKit.
Some examples of these are here.
A lot of them are accessories
to the table view object.
You can't do them on your own,
but you can turn them
on as accessory views,
and a lot of other
stuff that's available.
In addition, on this screen,
some more examples,
and some more examples here in photos.
Now notice in photos, the bottom bar,
there's only five icons.
I'm sorry, that's in mail.
I'm looking at mail messages there.
All right,
a couple of key little controls I want
to talk about very quickly to make sure
that we get consistent use of these.
The disclosure control,
this is the disclosure indicator.
It's a single arrow at the end of a row.
It tells the user that when
they tap the entire row,
anywhere on that row,
they're going to go to the
next screen in the hierarchy.
That's the action of that row.
Alternatively,
there is the detailed disclosure button,
which is the arrow in a circle.
And that can live on a row,
or it can live elsewhere on your screen.
And that,
it does a separate action from the host
row that it's on in this particular case.
And so it just says,
if you tap this user,
you're going to get more detail
for the object on this row,
rather than if you tap the row,
which does something else.
Goes to the next screen in the hierarchy,
or selects the network,
or whatever the example is.
Toolbars are key.
So you've got toolbars here in Mail.
This is where you can put commands that
directly affect the things on screen.
Typically,
you're only going to have controls
that affect the content on screen.
And as you go through this process
of designing an individual screen
and choosing the elements you want
from UIKit and the standard controls
that are built in the iPhone SDK,
you're going to run into a dilemma.
I guarantee it because I've
seen it almost every time
I've worked with a company.
And the dilemma is,
which control do I use?
So I want to talk about the experience
that we went through with AOL on one
of their screens as it applies to this.
So they had a settings
page for AIM on iPhone.
And the settings page had a username.
The question was, well,
do we just display the username
or do we group it with an icon?
Hmm.
They had a buddy icon.
Should they put it on the screen or not?
They had looked at the context page and
they knew that the photo was very useful,
but what about it?
They had the ability
to set online status,
but that could be done in multiple ways.
They could do a list.
They could do switches.
They could group items.
There's multiple ways
of doing these things.
And as you get down to the
level of designing a screen,
you're going to have to iterate through
this process to kind of figure out what's
the right thing for your application.
And they wanted to change away settings.
So here are these things
that they wanted to do.
What could they do with it?
And that could be done with a
predefined list or with a text box.
So they came up with
a preliminary mockup.
And here you could see that they've got
some switches up at the top for status,
and they've got a text
box for status message.
Yeah, it's a great first sketch,
but it's not quite right.
So next iteration, they went through,
they switched to I Interface
Builder at that point,
started to Mach things up in
a way that looked more real so
that it felt closer to reality.
And here you've got,
it looks more like the context
page in the phone application.
It shows message,
and that saves room right below that,
you know,
the two things are grouped together.
You've got grouped status now.
And invisibility is separate though.
And the question is, should it be?
[Transcript missing]
At this point, I'd like to invite my
last guest on stage,
Myspace, to talk about their experience
designing with some of this stuff.
Good morning, everybody.
My name is John Faith.
I'm vice president of
engineering for Myspace.
One of the teams I work with closely
on a daily basis is the mobile team.
And I'm really excited to be here
this morning to talk to you all about
our design and development process,
and also to be a part of
this development community.
So, Myspace Overview,
a little bit about our company.
We were founded four
years ago in Santa Monica,
California,
with the intent to connect people,
content and culture on the web.
As one of the early
social networking sites,
we've seen a lot of growth and success.
In April alone,
we signed up over 250,000 users a day,
had 117 million monthly unique visitors,
and had over 50 billion page views.
One of the interesting facts that
recently emerged about our company
is that 12% of all time spent online
domestically is spent on MySpace.
We continue to look for
growth opportunities,
and when something like
the iPhone SDK comes out,
we get really pumped up,
and so I want to talk a
little bit about that.
Prior to actually developing
for the iPhone SDK,
we have launched our own website,
m.myspace.com,
with the intent of having a
ubiquitous solution that is targeted
to all carriers and all devices.
We did so by paring down the core
functionality of a social network,
of our social network,
and coming up with the core
communication aspects of it.
And users totally like this.
We get over 1.5 million unique users
logging into m.myspace.com a day.
But we realized that the
iPhone users want a little bit
more out of their experience,
and so we designed
specifically for the iPhone.
We came up with something
that we believe is natural,
intuitive to users.
Our real core goal out of this
is if you are a MySpace user,
and if you are an iPhone user,
the first time that you
log into our application,
you're going to feel like it's home.
You know what to press,
you know where to go to get your data.
So how do we go about doing this?
First and foremost,
we came up with our core design mantra.
And the primary thing that
we concentrated on was
understanding our users.
MySpace users are a digital generation.
They grew up with the internet.
They grew up with mobile phones,
with digital cameras.
And the iPhone really blends the
best of all of that together.
Secondly, we streamline the experience.
Even from the WAP experience
that we create on m.myspace.com,
we had to rethink that because
this is a different architecture
that we're working with here.
Third, we've put together some cognitive
design into this process.
And finally, it is Myspace,
it's the iPhone,
so we wanted to create a really cool,
rich and fun application.
So John spoke a lot about paper
prototyping in this presentation,
and we were fully on board with this.
This is the wall from our
Atlanta office where all the
design went into our application.
I must say that we had a really
cool experience with this,
and our Atlanta team
are rabid iPhone users.
So they were the ones that
were really into this.
And what you're seeing here is
day one of paper prototyping.
Day two, we were applying different
navigational flow and figuring
out how the screens fit together.
Also, it gave us the ability to put
different standard controls to
MySpace features and make sure that
you're applying the right control to
the right feature set for the intended
functionality of your application.
This was all on a wall.
It was done really cool.
And then finally, within 48 hours,
a lot of caffeine later,
we were able to come up with our final
flow and present that back to product,
back to engineering,
and really start rocking and
rolling on the application itself.
Couple of slides from our application.
MySpace has always been about
connecting with your friends.
What I'd like you to take
a look at on this slide is
the iconography we're using.
This is a friend request slide.
Each table row has four different
actions that you can do on it.
It was very important to us to
port over the icons that users
are familiar with on our website.
And spruce them up a little bit,
but really stay core to
what you have if you have an
existing application or website.
Secondly, MySpace users,
check out profiles.
What was our challenge here
was to basically deconstruct
a standard profile on MySpace.
If you guys have been on MySpace,
you know that there's a lot
of information on a profile.
So what was correct to
port to this application?
Finally, what we're really stoked about
is the ability to interface
with the iPhone camera SDK,
and it provided a very easy
experience for us to provide the
users an experience to upload,
snap and upload pictures
to their MySpace account.
A couple things that I'd
like to leave you all with.
Read the human interface guideline.
That provided a wealth of knowledge
for us before we started coding,
before we started designing,
and I cannot emphasize enough the
importance of checking that out.
Secondly, use the UI kit and prototype.
Like I said,
by using the standard controls,
it really gives you the ability to
think about what your application
should be and what the UI object
hierarchy should be in it.
And finally, stay true to the device.
The iPhone is a very unique experience,
and you want to make sure that
you're designing specifically for
this hardware and for this SDK.
Thank you very much.
Great, thanks John.
Alright, let's wrap things up here with
one last step in this process.
The last step is to finalize.
This is where you're going to
polish and refine your design
and really make it iPhone.
Now this isn't the last thing you
do at the end of everything in terms
of the overall product development.
This is the last stage
of the design process,
but it's kind of like washing your hair,
right?
It's like shampoo, rinse, repeat.
This entire cycle is going to go
back around as you kind of refine and
iterate through your design process.
But let's talk about the
last few things you could do.
At this stage,
you need to think about how can you
integrate the key characteristics of
iPhone that you familiarize yourself with
way back at the beginning of the process,
and that you may have heard other
applications taking advantage of.
You can enhance your application
with photos and imagery.
You can augment with animation.
And you can use alternate
input mechanisms.
First of all,
enhancing with photos and imagery.
If you look at the contacts
application of iPhone,
it is dramatically enhanced by the
inclusion of the contacts photo.
Why?
Because if it wasn't there,
the users would have to navigate
and read a lot of information.
Because if a couple of
contacts that shared a name
lived in the same area code,
you'd have a lot of parallel
and duplicity between phone
numbers and other things.
And so you'd have to get into
the specifics and a lot of
reading to pick the contact.
So adding their photo lets you go, yes,
this is Jane Smith.
This is the one I want.
Same thing with iPod.
We added album art.
And album art does the
same thing as contacts.
You pull your iPhone out, you're like,
oh, which-- oh, it's on that album.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, that's the one I love,
right?
Quick recognition, visual recognition.
The brain does that far faster than
it does processing individual glyphs,
turning those into characters,
and then turning that into a word.
The same thing is true with maps
and real world objects that you can
incorporate in your application.
Augment with animation.
Think about how the iPhone
uses animation today,
and think about ways,
figure out ways to integrate that
into your application to augment
the user experience of your app.
Animation makes your
application realistic,
fun, and very approachable, right?
And that's what's a
big part of the iPhone,
is that it's very fun and approachable.
Animation adds physicality and realism.
It makes the thing feel
like it's right there,
and you're interacting directly with it.
How many times have you sat and pulled
like a Safari web page all the way to the
bottom and then had it bounce back up,
or the opposite?
Or I mean,
sometimes we just play with our phones
this way because of the animation effect
and the direct manipulation that's there.
Some examples of where we augment
iPhone today with animation
are we do it for deleting mail,
right?
You get the animation
effect that's there.
We do it for deleting notes.
You get the genie effect that
goes down to the trash can.
We do it for moving mail to folders.
Not many people necessarily
organize their mail that way,
but if you actually go into mail
application and move mail to a folder,
you see the mail message icon fly
to the folder you've selected.
Same effect for purchasing music.
You go to download a song and boom,
you get a little animation that just,
it drives home the point to the user,
gives them feedback that the
action they initiated is actually
underway and was undertaken.
We do animation for revealing map
features and showing map options.
Now this feature,
this particular page curl,
isn't yet available in the iPhone SDK,
but it's a great example of where
animation can augment the experience
and not detract from the main task.
Yet another example is changing photos.
With the multi-touch UI and the gesture,
we're also animating that change.
So there's this great feel.
I mean,
that's one of the first things you show
someone who doesn't have an iPhone,
is you say, oh, check this out.
And you go into Photos and
you flick through Photos.
That's the power of animation
and direct manipulation going on.
Same thing with Safari.
You choose a page,
you want to navigate to a
different site or a different page,
you just flick and you get the
feedback and then it animates forward
so you get that scaling effect.
It's not these hard,
dry changes of state.
Animation lets you morph between states.
And finally,
we do animation for customizing icons.
So all the icons wiggle on
the home page to tell you that
there's a state difference,
you're in a different mode,
you can do something different,
and yet there's not additional all
kinds of new UI and controls and
button bars and all this stuff.
Just changing state with
animation or conveying that to
the user is really valuable.
So as you consider adding animation
to augment your application,
be careful to only use it to
enhance an existing task or concept.
And make sure it carefully clarifies
a process and that it gives
valuable feedback to the user.
Don't animate everything on
screen just because it's cool.
Lastly,
there are ultimate input mechanisms,
which I talked about
briefly at the beginning.
And they come down to accelerometer for
detecting orientation of the phone and
doing something interesting with that.
Using location to add the where
variable to your application,
helping your users
understand where they are,
where other users are, and how that might
impact your application.
Only do these things if they make
sense and augment the experience of
your application and its capabilities.
Don't do it just because it's cool.
And lastly, complex gestures.
And I'll finish on this.
This is beyond standard tap and drag.
I know that there's a lot of
interest in doing some really cool,
innovative, new, complex gestures.
But I want to caution you
to take care with that.
Start with the first version
of iPhone that's built on
everything that's there today,
and use the gestures that we have,
which is the swipe,
and basically it's a drag, and tap.
The problem with creating your own and
innovating with your own gestures is
that if we come up with a standardized
gesture for iPhone S in the future,
that does something similar to yours,
but it's slightly different,
your app is going to stand out as being
different from what we've done for that
same type of gesture from the user.
So only do it if you really,
really have to,
and if it makes total sense.
And there's a great example of an
app that was demoed in Keynote,
MIM, from MIM Vista,
that does some unique things,
and appropriately so, I think,
for their space.
So that's the last step in this process,
and I want to drive home one final point.
I made the point that the
iPhone development cycle
requires a huge design phase.
And I hope that you see now that
there's a lot to do in terms of design,
but the end results of that
design process are great.
You're going to come up
with something phenomenal,
just like AOL did, just like HandMark did
with Pocket Express,
and just like MySpace did with everything
that they learned through the process.
So one call to action for you is,
make sure that you're
allocating enough design time,
and you've got dedicated resources,
and then get into the coding,
then get into debugging,
then get into testing to make sure
that you've got the right design,
and it works exactly the
way your users want it to.
You need a blueprint, you need a design,
you need a plan when you're
designing for iPhone,
and I hope that you've learned
enough today to set a plan in motion,
and to aim yourself in
the right direction.
One of the best resources for
you to go to is the iPhone
Human Interface Guidelines.
There's some really talented
people contributing to that.
There's a wealth of resources
there and information about how
to use specific UI controls,
when to use them, when not to use them,
and I encourage you
to go to that as well.
And lastly,
I encourage you to contact me either
during the show if you can find me,
or after the show, send me an email,
and I would love to hook up with
you and work with you one-on-one
on your application to make it as
great as it possibly can for iPhone.
You can do this, it's hard work,
takes a lot of dedication, a lot of time,
but the end result is
absolutely worth it.
Thank you for coming today.